When we entered
the space program in the essentially early days of
NASA's development, what differences do you see
between then and now in terms of NASA's ideology
and purpose? Well, the actual purpose of NASA
really hasn't changed. It's a research and
development organization, and as you may be
aware, it grew out of the NACA, or NACA, which is the
National Aeronautics Council, something
that transitioned from NACA to NASA was
occasioned by the Space Act of 1958, which in turn
was at least in part triggered by the success of the
Soviet space program. And from that time on,
basically NASA has undertaken in the space arena
to advance the state of technology and science,
and to carry out the mission for the space missions
that have been deemed most appropriate by the
President and other administrations including
the Congress. And of course we, following
President Kennedy's commitment to put a man on the
moon before the end of the decade of the 60s,
put the bulk of our resources into that effort. And
then following the successful conclusion of
that, it had become obviously obvious to a lot of
people within NASA and presumably many people in
the government that the throwaway spacecraft is
an extravagant luxury and we needed to work on
something that would be reusable many times, in
turn has evolved into the Shuttle Spacecraft
System, which is more appropriately known as the
National Space Transportation System. And by
extension, following the realization that the
Shuttle would in fact be successful, Mr. Reagan
wanted us to concentrate on more immediate
practical applications of the Shuttle for a year
or two, which was done. And now we've embarked on
building a permanent unmanned space station to be
operational before the end of the decade. It
started in 84, I think, before 94 came out.
When NASA was created under Eisenhower in 58, was
it intended to be a civilian type of organization,
even though its first members were primary
military? Well, it was chartered. who would
handle the civilian space program of the U.S. And I
would take issue with your statement that the
first members of the military, because the bulk of
the agency was and always has been civilian. If you
look at the Project Mercury astronauts, these
basically were all military. There were only
seven people out of several thousand in the
agency. And, of course, all of the folks that had
been working for NACA in the aeronautical field,
that is the airfoil designers, the engine people,
the ones that build and operate the wind tunnels
and things of that sort, came along with the
agency. And the unmanned space program also grew
up within NASA, and this was when we were totally
surveying. We probed to Jupiter and Mars, to
Venus, things like that. So really there's only a
very small percentage of military and those that
are military working with NASA are basically
following the civilian pursuers in their
uniform. Do you think that the sexual revolution
of the 70s and the civil rights movement of the 60s
have affected the attitude of NASA and the
entrance of the minorities into the space
program? Well, I guess you'd have to say that to the
extent that these things have affected the
sociology of the United States in general, they
have also affected the sociology of NASA
specifically, we are finding that
we can now obtain, for example, in the minority,
racial minority category, racial minorities
that have gained flight training and test pilot
experience in the military, and are available to
enter into the NASA program were back in the early
60s, there were not such people anywhere in the
military or in the U.S. social structure. We were
also finding quite a number of women engineers,
scientists, medical doctors, things of this
sort, and you're starting to see women as pilots in
the armed forces and flying for the commercial
airlines. And I would imagine that before too many
years are out, like, we'll have some selected
pilot category within NASA also. Can you check
this real quick? Yeah, I think that will work. Were
women and minorities brought in gradually, or as
you said, since there weren't too many in the 60s,
was there a sudden push to bring them in? There was
not a sudden push, but by the same token, they
weren't brought in gradually either.
I came into the program in 66, and there was one
selection of 11 scientists in 67, and we got a few of
the NOL, the Mandorbin Laboratory guys, when
their program was canceled. But basically,
between 1967 and 1978, 11 years, there were no new
inputs into the astronaut corps. And what
happened in 1978, we selected a total of 30 people,
as they would call it, including six women and
several racial minorities. And in the
intervening 11 years, the
texture of our social fabric had changed quite a
bit. And additionally, we were looking at
selecting people specifically in career
patterns, i.e., as mission specialists, having
created that billet, and looking at a spacecraft
which was big enough to carry more than just the two
or three that were required to fly it, We recently
completed a Mission 7 on board, the 41G mission,
and there's one Schedule 8 on board about a year
from now. So you're getting to the point where you
can afford to have a lot of differentiation in
terms of duties and experience. It just seemed
that's the way the situation fell out. In what ways
do you think that women and minorities have added
or maybe subtracted from the NASA program? Well, I
think probably the biggest way that they've added
is just by showing the American people that we've
got a real cross-section of the population
involved. You can't help but feel that you're
getting more support from areas representing
racial minorities and women's groups and things
of this sort, and they see one of their own up there.
participating and doing a good job. As you're
probably aware, a tremendous demand for talks by
and interviews with Sally Ride and some of the
other folks. In fact, that's a bit of a personal
hardship on her, and she's been relieved that Judy
Resnick and some of the other folks wouldn't have
gotten up to help share the load. Oh, that's good. I
think it may also be interesting to look back and
you note that the Soviets were the first to put a
woman in space, Valentina Tereshkova. They made
sure that she was up there by herself, but the
technology basically was a one-person capsule at
the time. And until we announced in, it must have
been March of 82, When Sally arrived with me going
up on a space shuttle flight, they had absolutely
no interest discernible in having any more women
in space. Immediately
after Sally was selected and announced, we
started getting questions along the lines of, why
do you want to put a woman into space? We've already
done it once. And so basically the implication
being that was all that mattered. And what are her
qualifications? What's she going to do up there?
And then there was a long silence, and in
August of 82, that is about five months later,
during the Unispace conference in Austria, they
had arranged to have a TV downlink to the
conference, and all of a sudden they announced, by
the way, Svetlana Savitskaya, for the glory of
Mother Russia, and all that sort of thing, is the a
crew member in the current Soyuz crew going up to
the Soyuz would have a Beamer message down to the
assembled delegates. So they were very anxious
that the United States might be perceived as
affording greater opportunities to humankind
than they were. And then again this spring, when it
was, I don't know, I guess it was about a year ago
when it was announced that the Soyuz was going up
again, Kathy Charlton would be performing in the
spacewalk, the EVA. We didn't hear anything from
them, but you notice about July of this year, they
made a point of sending Svetlana Savitskaya up a
second time, thereby getting the title of the
first woman to go into space twice, and they sent
her outside on the spacewalk, just so they could
claim that the first spacewalk by a woman was done
by a Soviet cosmonaut, and they're very
interested in maintaining this sort of Guinness
World Record statute on things. They don't have
anything like the MMU do they? No, they've been
interested in that too and we were privately a
little bit apprehensive that there might be some
effort underway to say a month before our flight
back in February to do something that would claim
to be an MMU flight but they didn't. STS-5 was The
first shuttle flight to deploy a satellite, they
did deploy two communications satellites, but
about three months or two months before that, the
Soviets made a point of deploying a satellite from
the Soviet. As we can tell, it was something that
opened the hatch, and they pushed it out, and they
deployed a satellite. If you read their version of
the history books, I think you will probably find
that they claimed to have deployed the first
sub-satellite or artificial satellite from a
space station or a space group. Well, after your
flight, I read a newspaper article that said that
the Russians had said that the flight was an
overall failure because of several
malfunctions, but they overlooked the MMU
flight. How do you feel about that? We did have some
problems, but let me take them one or two at a time.
You've got to bear in mind that the shuttle, being a
space transportation system, is just that. The
two communications satellites were privately
owned, and in order to get from the shuttle
altitude to the geosynchronous or geostationary
altitude that is used for communications relay
satellites, you basically need two additional
motors or burns to boost the satellite up, first
into an elliptic motor and into a circular motor,
22,300. And the satellite manufacturer, Hughes,
provides the second motor as an integral part of it
and contracted with McDonnell Douglas to provide
the first stage motor as a proprietary launch
system that he's purchased from certified by
McDonnell-Lewis, and basically the role of the
shuttle is to carry this assembly into orbit,
point it in the right direction, and deploy it at
the specified time, all of which we did. The
problem that prevented the two satellites from
getting into orbit was that the throat of the
nozzle in the first stage motor that was the
McDonnell-Lewis thing deteriorated and blew out
after about 18 seconds. into a planned 80-some
second burn. So they got only a fraction of the
velocity. And it was very consistent, too,
because they both wound up in essentially similar
orbits, about 150 by 600. So to the extent that, if
you'll pardon my using the skydiving analogy,
that if a skydiver's parachute doesn't open, he's
going to hold the power to the plane responsible.
uh we don't feel that nasa was responsible for the
failures but we acknowledge that you've got to
consider in the context of the overall system
there was a problem at the same time we were anxious
to in the next mission 51a is going to go up there and
try to retrieve these two satellites and bring
them back for refurbishment so you can at least say
that Things launched on expendable launch
vehicles like the Ariane or the Delta tend to wind
up at the bottom of the Atlantic Ocean. No problem
over there, is there? Things launched out of the
shuttle tend to be in orbit because you're already
in orbit when you deploy them. Okay. You were
admitted to NASA in the period following the
launches of Sputniks 1 and 2. This time might be
called the American race for space. What do you
feel was the emotional tone of that period? um
before we had our before we landed on the moon well
when i came in which is in 66 eight years after uh
well almost nine years after the first sputnik i
wouldn't say that we really had a a race for space
mentality we were more concerned about the the
timetable that had been agreed to i.e man on the
moon when we turned before the end of 69 and the
efforts were bent more towards working against
the calendar than they were racing with the
Russians. We heard at one time that they were
interested in sending manned spacecraft to the
Moon, and we didn't hear any more about that. When
the actual Apollo 11 occasion did come around,
they were most cooperative. They had Luna 16 in
orbit. around the moon. This was an unmanned
reconnaissance or photographic probe. They
contacted us in the control center and offered to
do anything that was necessary to keep Luna 16 out
of the way of Apollo 11, because they didn't want to
shoulder the responsibility for any sort of
problems with the lunar landing or returns. I
thought
that President Kennedy had kind of a grudge match
going with the Russians about the space race. That
was the impression I received over the years. I
don't think you can call it a grudge match. One of
the things that I think is interesting and useful
in the international arena is that In
undertakings in space, basically, whenever the
players are competing against natural
obstacles, it's a situation where there really
aren't any losers. If we win and get the man to the
moon and back, basically, we've done so as
representatives of humanity. It's not really a
matter of, hey, we beat the Russians and now let's
see what other events we can You notice that during
Apollo 11 there was worldwide non-political
interest just in the fact that, hey, here's some
people that happen to be Americans that are up
there really walking around on the moon. And even
the Soviets applauded that.
Well, how do you view Russia's involvement in
space, and do you think that they have added
valuable technology to our space program, or have
we aided them? Well, I can't say that I'm aware of
any technology that we've just gotten from the
Russians. My general assessment, and I caution
you that it's just a general one, is that our
program is technologically superior and more
sophisticated than the Soviet program. However,
they have a national commitment to applying the
things that they have developed, specifically
the Soyuz and the Soyuz space station. They
apparently are willing to manufacture Soyuz
spacecraft in fairly large numbers so they can go
and use them. And with the Salyut, their space
station, the first one of which was put up in 71,
Salyut 1, I think it was 71, they've had
essentially a continuous stream of these space
stations up there, presumably getting slightly
larger and with more equipment on them. Recently
they had a crew of three continuously aloft for 238
days. They're very interested in the physiology
of long-term exposure to weightlessness. Some
people take this as a sign that they are working
very hard to be able to put a man or a man in orbit
around Mars first. When you look at a Mars mission,
for any economical
propellant scenario, generally it's going to
take you about a year to get there and about a year to
get back, so you need to understand what is
involved in either providing artificial gravity
or enabling the human body to withstand
weightlessness for a period of about two years and
then readapt to gravity when you get back here.
They had a great deal of trouble. I understand they
couldn't walk for—well, they're still having
trouble walking now after that period of
non-weightlifting. Well, I confess I really
haven't gotten any details on that, but the guys
that were up for 211 days, the previous bunch,
didn't seem to have any trouble at all with
happening. Our philosophy from Skylab
experience has been that if the individuals
involved exercise diligently every day and keep
in shape, you probably won't have any
difficulties. What was the other part? Oh, have
they gotten anything from us? I guess we would have
to say that they appear to have gotten some things
from us. They have copied some of our operational
techniques. Prior to the Apollo-Soyuz mission,
their control center was a mysterious place, and
they announced in the newspapers, after their
cosmonauts were in orbit, by the way, yesterday
they were launched and they were doing well and
happy. I hope you learned a lot about public
relations in the Apollo-Soyuz mission, because
now they've televised some of their launches,
they show pictures of the inside of the control
center, keep their own citizenry at least a lot
more involved
in what's going on. Additionally, it appears that
the Soviets are building something that looks
like a space shuttle.
You see pictures and reports in Aviation Week and
various other sources It may be that they're
attempting to copy the space shuttle technology.
Their approach is more to the shuttle than just the
exterior configuration, so it'll be interesting
to see how they do with that. Russia has had people
of other nations fly with them on space missions.
Do you see America doing the same in the future?
Well, we already have. Oh, yeah? In November of
last year, On the first space lab mission, we had a
West German payload specialist, Ulf Merbold,
representing ESA, the European Space Agency, as a
crew member. And on this last flight, 41G, we had a
Canadian naval officer, Martin Garneau, on board
as a payload specialist. There are a lot more in the
offing. The situation, I'm chagrined to say, has
gotten to the point where I can no longer keep track
of all the crew assignments and who's on what. But
we have commitments to, or have extended offers
to, oh boy, China, Brazil, Australia, Saudi
Arabia, and
I think Argentina, but I'm not sure. But in total,
about a dozen different countries have their crew
members fly on the shuttle, and we are actively
seeking international participation in the
space station program. It's expected that the
Japanese will build a module to go on the space
station, and the European Space Agency, ESA, is
expected to participate, and the Canadian
Government will probably manipulator arm for the
space station as they did the manipulator arm for
the shuttle.
Has President Reagan's administration affected
NASA's budget or overall
purpose? Well, I think Mr. Reagan has been very
supportive of the first space shuttle.
Obviously, it was already well underway when he
came into office, but he recognized the potential
of the system and the need to continue the funding
to continue the development on it. And my opinion
is that he was initially reluctant to commit
additional money to do things beyond applying the
space shuttle, and then he was convinced of the
utility of the space station basically endorsed
it, gave the go-ahead back in January during the
State of the Union speech. And although it is not a
NASA program, he has recently initiated this
so-called Strategic Defense Initiative for Star
Wars project within the Air Force to see if there is
a way, using the space vantage point of the space
technology, to get out of this assured mutual
destruction our mutually assured destruction
stalemate between ourselves and the Soviet
Union. Well, my next question is about the Star
Wars defense. Does NASA have any plans to aid
President Reagan in developing a space defense
program for Star Wars? MR. No. Getting back to one
of the previous questions, NASA is a civilian
space agency. There is also a fairly large
military space program, as you're probably
aware, administered by the Air Force, but with
involvement from other services and other
governmental agencies. And the Strategic
Defense Initiative is strictly a military air
force program and is being carried out by them.
Lieutenant General James Abrahamson, who was
associate administrator for manned spaceflight
at NASA for a couple of years. He was heading up the
Strategic Defense Initiative. He's an Air Force
officer, and his responsibility prior to coming
to NASA was as the program manager of the F-16
fighter program, so it's certainly in keeping
with his background.
What do you think of President Reagan's plans to
have people such as poets, musicians, teachers,
and businessmen go into space with you and
observe? Well, the basic philosophy arose out of a
recognition that on every space shuttle flight,
we had seats for at least seven people, and that we
were generally not filling them up with
professional and these seats could be filled at
very small additional cost since they were going
on anyway. And it was recognized that since the
American taxpayer is paying for the basic shuttle
program and subsidizing the flights, although
we're getting a lot of the operating expenses back
from the commercial users now, that we might as
well look around and and see if we couldn't carry
some American citizens to share the experience.
The charter of NASA under the Space Act of 1958 is
sufficiently broad to allow us to do things like
this, with the justification being the
dissemination of knowledge and the advancement
of technology and the state of the art in the space
program. And it was more a matter of determining
how you would select people like this so that the
American public was generally supportive of the
fact that Mrs. so-and-so or Mr. so-and-so or Dr.
somebody or other was going up instead of
wondering why in the world the agency picked a
person like that. The system was set up to allow us
to carry journalists poets, artists, executives
or managers from private industry, as well as the
middle levels of the government, educators. And
with Mr. Reagan's selection of an educator,
secondary
school or elementary teacher, which is his call as
the chief executive to be the first one, gave the
program 100% green light. We're looking forward
to seeing somebody in about a year to come fly with
us. Will they have to go through a certain program
to get ready for the flight? Yeah. We don't think
it'll be a very elaborate program, probably about
two months or maybe a little longer. One of the
primary things you would like to assure yourself
of in any sort of training program like this is that
in the event that there is some sort of a a crisis
situation on board the shuttle. That individual
will not get hysterical and go to pieces or try to do
something rash, but he'll be content to stay out of
the way, strap in a seat or something, and let the
crew handle the problem, getting all panicky. And
then, of course, they will trade him for whoever in
operating some of the facilities in the Shuttle,
that we can be an independent person and not have to
rely on the food for everything. Using the manned
mobile unit, or the MMU, you were the world's first
human satellite. How did you feel at the time?
The feeling was more of a release than anything
else in that I had been working on the program for
quite a number of years, and we had had troubles
with the two communication systems, like
sanitation and inflatable run of the balloon. And
in some of the previous missions, the guys had
trouble even getting the pressure set to work
properly. You know, we were somewhat
apprehensive. There might be something come up
that would either cancel the EVAs or bring the
whole mission back early or something like that.
So close and yet so far.